# CAS Applied Data Science 2023-2024 - Final Report by Paula Vazquez

This repository contains the data and notebooks used in the final project: **Prostate Cancer Prediction and Biomarker Identification Using Machine Learning and Deep Learning Algorithms on Transcriptome Data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Database**.

## Main Contents

### DataMiner_main Folder

This folder contains the following:

-   **Notebooks**: `Data_Retrieval_TCGA_Downloader.ipynb to retrive the data using the tcga_downloader and the manifest file`

-   **Python Scripts**: `tcga_downloader  (from: https://github.com/vappiah/DataMiner, Author:`Vincent Vappiah (2021.

-   **Manifest File**: Used to retrieve the RNA-seq data for prostate cancer (PRAD) from the TCGA database.

-   **Retrieved Original Data**: Original PRAD data and metadata (inside the PRAD sub folder).

-   **Generated Output**: Results from the pyDeseq2 analysis. This include several tables including the generated input data for ML (PRAD_ML_df_gene_names.csv). (inside the PRAD sub folder)

### Notebooks and Scripts

-   **Data_Preparation_DE_ML_and_DE_analysis_Final.ipynb**:

    -   Prepares data for differential expression (DE) analysis.

    -   Performs DE analysis with pyDeseq2, filters results, and visualizes the DE analysis.

    -   Prepares data for applying machine learning (ML) algorithms with the filtered data.

-   **Random_Forest_PCA_Linear_Regression_Important_Features_PubMed_Final.ipynb**:

    -   Applies logistic regression and random forest to PRAD data.

    -   Computes feature importances (Gini, SHAP, permutation importances).

    -   Generates Venn diagrams of common features and retrieves PubMed info for selected genes.

-   **GO_analysis_human_genes.R**:

    -   Performs Gene Ontology analysis on selected gene lists for human genes using R.

-   **IGTD_Tabular_data_to_images.ipynb**:

    -   Converts tabular data into images using the IGTD.

-   **CNN_collab_final.ipynb**:

    -   Applies convolutional neural networks (CNN) to the IGTD-generated images.

    -   Designed to run in Google Colab.

### Other Contents

-   **CAS_Final_Project_Report_Paula_Vazquez.pdf**: Includes the project report text and figures.

-   **IGTD Folder**: Contains the scripts used by the IGTD algorithm. (cloned from: [https://github.com/zhuyitan/IGTD](https://github.com/zhuyitan/IGTD.) and described by Zhu Y., et al. (2021).

-   **Results Folder**: Contains the images generated by the IGTD algorithm applied to the tabular PRAD RNA-seq data. (data.zip)
